---
layout: post
title: The Radio
date: 2010-10-09 17:37:51.000000000 -07:00
status: published
published: true
image: radio.jpg
type: post
---

I remember when I got my first transistor radio.

I found it at the dump, sitting by itself in a tall grass tuft in the
swap shed, and convinced my dad to take it home. I used to disassemble
any electronics I could get my hands on; being able to take them apart
and learn how they work was far more interesting than multiplication
tables and homework from school. Behind the shiny, beige plastic and
the brown speaker grills was the power to translate something invisible
into something real. After scrounging up an extension cord from my Dad's
shop earlier that day, I faked going to sleep early so I could sneak out
to the back porch and tune into the night-time broadcasts.

The radio didn't work at first. I tuned the radio to the right place,
but no matter how much I tugged on the dial, the signal always came in
weak and drowned in static, a signal just barely out of reach. I opened
the radio with a screwdriver, blew the dust out of the case and
re-adjusted the antenna. I tried rotating the dial again and the signal
got clearer, but it still wasn't perfect.

I wasn't willing to give up.

I reached into the case and flicked the tuning capacitor with my finger.

A single blob of dried mud shattered and the radio sprang to life with a
newly acquired signal. I don't remember how long I spent that night,
tuning into every station I could find, listening to this new source of
music, knowledge and an understanding of the outside world, beyond the
evergreen trees and snow-covered mountain peaks.
