---
layout: post
title: Debunking SEO
date: 2011-10-02 17:42:37.000000000 -07:00
status: published
type: post
---
SEO -- otherwise known as Search Engine Optimization -- is the process 
of improving a website so that search engines can more easily index 
relevant content with the goal of improving how soon it will show up in 
a search engine's index. Online (and sometimes offline) contractors 
abuse the term "search engine optimization" to sell a service to 
improve SEO ratings. About ninety-eight percent of those so-called 
contractors -- and likely more -- are quacks. Companies can waste 
significant amounts of both time and money on these contractors to 
improve their website's SEO ratings. If you're the business, 
unfortunately, that contractor is hoping to fool you into paying him 
for a rain-dance.

Let me re-iterate if you missed the last paragraph: **in the majority
of cases, these SEO services are a pile of crap**. If you're an
executive paying someone to improve your company's website SEO, I can
almost guarantee you're wasting money that you could be spending on
your employees. Most of these contractors know they're selling you a
rain dance and use that as a business opportunity to sap you for as
much money as they possibly can.

One half of a search engine generates an index of all the websites that 
it has found on the Internet. The other half is what the user primarily 
interacts with: the user types in a set of keywords (a query) and the 
search engine tries to find relevant information in its indexes related 
to that set of keywords (a set of results). This creates a bottleneck: 
a search engine is a gateway for websites traffic. SEO, as we've 
discussed earlier, is the process of optimizing a website so a search 
engine can find more relevant results for a user's query.

They key to optimizing a website then -- as trite and obvious as it 
seems -- is through relevant and useful content.

That easy, you say? Well, not really, no.

Machines generally have an extremely hard time trying to understand 
what is and isn't relevant to users. They can do massive amounts of 
statistical analysis on the data that they collect but that takes a 
significant amount of time and most users are impatient. Most modern 
search engines use other relevant metrics: for example, from the search 
engine's point of view, if a user clicks on a result and then clicks 
the "back" button in their browser, the search engine will see that the 
user has immediately requested the results page again and notice that 
the website the user viewed was not useful to them. There are other 
metrics that search engines use, but the overall message is that **a 
search engine's results reflect the usefulness of content to a user**. 
If a user doesn't like what they see and they leave the website, not 
only will they likely never come back, but the search engine will 
notice that as well, compounding the effect of useless and irrelevant 
content.

There are many metrics but it all boils down to a bit of common-sense 
and a bit of understanding that your users are more than countable 
business goals. You might have some default blame-reducing phrase like 
*"That's not a problem for us! We have good content!"* and your 
SEO-contractor will likely agree with you. The fact is, however, that 
if your statistics say your content is useless or irrelevant to your 
users, no amount of paying a contractor to improve your SEO will solve 
the problem. If your users find your website in any way irrelevant or 
useless for their direct and immediate needs, they will leave and they 
will never come back.

So, it's fairly clear that it's important for users to see relevant and 
useful content. The prerequisite for that is to understand who your 
users actually are. If are targeting everyone indiscriminately and 
you're not Facebook or some other Web 2.0 social media big-shot, you're 
heading for a world of hurt. Take a step outside of your business 
mindset and think about all the people who come to your website. Put 
yourself in their shoes. What purpose do they have when they visit your 
website? What should they come to you for? What do they expect to see 
when they hit the first landing page? You can't target your content for 
an undefined market segment and expect to succeed.

At this point you're probably asking, *"Okay, this is all great 
information, but what can we do to fix it?".*

That's a tough question and it the answer, like so many things in this 
world, is that it depends. If I know your business, I can definitely 
tell you some ways your content is failing to deliver and usually 
within reading one or two pages. Again, take a step outside of your 
business-only mindset and hear me out.

Your website likely isn't delivering what you expected from it because 
the content on your website is broken. By broken, it means large 
numbers of your visitors view one page, and the close your website in 
their browser. Your users don't want to read what you have to say, and 
stuffing more keywords, semantic tags, images, "alt" attributes, and 
flash media into the page won't fix the problem they have. **Improve 
the experience of your users on your website by adding real, useful, 
content.** What is useful to your users is completely dependent on who 
you're targeting. Real content targeted at real people tends to deliver 
real results.

Most people visit a website to answer a question that they have. That 
question could be an answer to a number of  their problems, or they 
could be seeking advice about a subject or information about an 
industry, or they are looking to buy a product, in that order. If you 
can't immediately answer that question they came to you for, they will 
leave. Mission failed. Most corporate websites focus exclusively on 
only the last of those three segments to the exclusion of all else. 
They likely see it as the quickest return of investment: it's a quick, 
fast, and easy way to make a buck from their online presence. That 
short-sighted thinking means that when that last segment they 
exclusively targeted evaporates -- it quickly will when search engines 
rank the website poorly -- the website becomes costly dead weight 
instead of an active revenue stream.

Many websites also suffer from ego-driven development. The most visible 
symptom of EDD is company-centric, egoistic website content. Websites 
suffering from it usually talk about "our commitment", "our products" 
or "our services". See the common word there? It shifts the focus from 
the visitor back to the company itself. It might make the pointy-haired 
boss happy to see it **but it provides absolutely no value whatsoever 
to the visitor**. Many normally savvy business owners tend to believe 
that marketing and sales copy is all about their business but 
absolutely nothing could be father from the truth. Your visitors don't 
care about your company. They only care about what the company can do 
for them right now.

Many websites also like to list lots of facts about their products. As 
any marketer (or any behavioral psychologist) worth their salt will 
tell you: people react to emotional stimuli and then rationalize the 
feelings with facts afterward. Facts are great for post-purchase 
rationalization, but they don't connect with people on an initial 
emotional level. Save the facts for the flat-sheets and technical 
documentation. Tell people about the benefits that your product 
provides, and show how it compares to alternatives provided by others 
in the community.

Often a company will list the facts given to them by an expert in their 
company, without thinking about how those facts relate to the visitor. 
The technical people that were supposed to recommend your product will 
never see the website because the executive that wanted to demo the 
product got scared away by the information overload. This isn't to say 
that you should strip all factual content from your website. On the 
contrary, facts increase credibility and authority, but listing the 
product's benefits increase the number of customers because it appeals 
to their own self-interest.

<strong>The greatest way to improve your SEO isn't to hire an outside 
contractor to perform some magic voodoo</strong>. Instead, target a 
defined market segment as a whole, solve a problem they have, and 
improve your content to be more relevant to your users. There's an 
analogy from SEO that applies here: website content is like a good 
book. A search engine is merely a scout for massive publishing house 
(website visitors) to find the good writers. If no one wants to read 
your book because it doesn't answer the questions they have, then it 
won't get published. Yes, you can write a masterpiece vetted by every 
expert you have on staff, but it won't matter if it doesn't get 
published by the publishing house. Mission failed.

How does this all relate back to SEO contractors? In short, most of 
those so-called experts are not actually experts at all. They know how 
to manipulate statistics in Google Analytics to temporarily give you a 
rating boost that seems positive, but only for a premium fee. It'll 
give your company a temporary ego boost and may attract some temporary 
visitors but it won't increase your revenue in the long-term or help to 
create a community around your products. In short, these contractors 
are gaming you for your money and likely selling you bogus.

Don't waste your money on SEO contractors. Spend it building useful, 
customer-focused content that will keep visitors and attract all 
segments of the market. The more reasons for people to stay on your 
website, and the more positive traffic you can keep, the less important 
SEO will be, and the higher your search ratings will be.
